---
layout: post
status: publish
published: true
title: Fedora 9
author:
  display_name: mikez0r
  login: mikez0r
  email: msarahan@gmail.com
  url: http://
author_login: mikez0r
author_email: msarahan@gmail.com
author_url: http://
wordpress_id: 44
wordpress_url: http://t3hmikez0r.com/?p=44
date: '2008-05-13 18:43:40 -0700'
date_gmt: '2008-05-14 01:43:40 -0700'
categories:
- Nerd
tags: []
comments: []
---
<p>I run linux at work. It eases my conscience to not depend on Microshit. Fedora 9 was released today. I've been a Ubuntu fan for a while now, but some of the software I use for work (IMOD) isn't easily made to run on Ubuntu. I know it should be just figuring out the proper paths to tell it, but I wasted a day and decided it wasn't worth any more time than that. On to Fedora (8).</p>
<p>Now, with the update today, I tried the preupgrade option. It's a cool idea - it downloads updated files, reboots, does whatever changes it needs to, and bam, updated OS. It stalled at the later stage - 90.0%, something about metadata. I figured it sounded too good to be true anyway. I downloaded the new install DVD (thanks kernel.org!), and tried an upgrade install. It took forever! Why do these take so much longer? I know there are more packages to install, and maybe these have to be downloaded. That's a valid excuse. Well, ok, this time it finished. I rebooted to a pretty unhappy computer - no GUI at all. The display flickered a bit, and then gave up. Command prompt time. I checked into Xorg's log file - version mismatch on the video driver (radeonhd). Must not have gotten updated in the upgrade install (why not?) A quick yum install took care of that, and X came up. However, none of my desktops would load - not gnome, not KDE, and not enlightenment. Showstopper. I rebooted and did a fresh install. Now things are pretty good. I had to fight to get Flash working. I had to feed my Pandora addiction. For those of you wanting to know how to accomplish this feat, you must sacrifice your first born with a 32-hour old blade under a full moon...</p>
<p>No, really, here's what you have to do (from http://docs.fedoraproject.org/release-notes/f8/en_US/sn-Desktop.html):</p>
<div class="procedure">
<ol type="1">
<li>Create the 32bit mozilla plugin directory using this command:
<pre class="screen">su -c 'mkdir -p /usr/lib/mozilla/plugins'</pre>
</li>
<li>Install the <span class="package">nspluginwrapper.i386</span>, 	    <span class="package">nspluginwrapper.x86_64</span>, and 	    <span class="package">pulseaudio-libs.i386</span> packages:
<pre class="screen">su -c "yum -y install nspluginwrapper.{i386,x86_64} pulseaudio-libs.i386"</pre>
</li>
<li>Install <span class="package">flash-plugin</span> as shown above.</li>
<li>Run <code class="command">mozilla-plugin-config</code> to register 	    the flash plugin:
<pre class="screen">su -c 'mozilla-plugin-config -i -g -v'</pre>
</li>
<li>Close all <span class="application"><strong>Firefox</strong></span> windows, 	    and then relaunch <span class="application"><strong>Firefox</strong></span>.</li>
<li>Type <strong class="userinput"><code>about:plugins</code></strong> in the URL bar 	    to ensure the plugin is loaded.</li>
<li>If it isn't loading, try this command (firefox 3 does things a little differently from firefox 2)<br />
su -c 'ln -s /usr/lib/mozilla/plugins /usr/lib64/firefox-3.0b5/'</li>
</ol>
</div>
<p>Now sound probably isn't working yet. Run these commands next, then restart firefox if you have it running at this point.</p>
<pre class="screen">su -c "yum -y install libflashsupport-000-0.5.svn20070904.{i386,x86_64}"
su -c 'mozilla-plugin-config -i -g -v'

Thanks to http://www.derekhildreth.com/blog/how-to-fix-the-no-sound-issue-in-firefox-flash/ for this last bit.

YMMV, but I hope this helps.</pre>
